samsungtv: add trigger (#45882)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_triggers/samsungtv.turn_on.markdown

5. Select the available trigger **Device is requested to turn on**.
6. Select **Save**.

### Options in the UI

{% options_ui %}
Device:
  description: >
    The Samsung TV media player device that should be watched for a turn-on request. Only Samsung TV entities are valid targeted devices for this trigger.
  required: true
Trigger:
  description: >
    The trigger **Device is requested to turn on**.
  required: true
{% endoptions_ui %}

{% include triggers/yaml_header.md %}

In YAML, refer to this trigger as `device` of type `samsungtv.turn_on`. A basic example looks like this:

{% example %}
trigger: |
  device_id: my_samsungtv_device_id
  domain: samsungtv
  type: samsungtv.turn_on
  trigger: device
{% endexample %}

This fires every time Home Assistant requires the device with ID `my_samsungtv_device_id` to turn on.

### Options in YAML

YAML sometimes provides additional options for more complex use cases that are not available through the UI.

{% options_yaml %}
device_id:
  description: >
    The ID of the Samsung TV media player device that should be watched for a turn-on request. Only Samsung TV devices are valid targets for this trigger.
  required: true

>   type: string

Reviewer: If https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/pull/45882/changes#r3430728471 is accepted + based on the code, the options should be (like in the two resolved Copilot suggestions):

```suggestion
trigger:
  description: The trigger type. For this trigger, use `samsungtv.turn_on`.
  required: true
  type: string
device_id:
  description: One or more device IDs of Samsung TV devices to watch. At least one of `device_id` or `entity_id` must be set. To use more than one device ID, enter them as a list.
  required: false
  type: string
entity_id:
  description: One or more entity IDs of Samsung TV entities to watch. At least one of `device_id` or `entity_id` must be set. To use more than one entity ID, enter them as a list.
  required: false
  type: string
```

Author: Done! Thank you.

---

The **Device is requested to turn on** trigger fires when Home Assistant requests a Samsung TV to turn on. This happens when a turn_on action is called by an automation, a script or from the UI, targeting a Samsung TV entity.

Use it when the built-in Wake-on-LAN (WoL) support in the Samsung TV integration is not sufficient for your setup. For example, when the TV is connected to a smart strip, when WoL is not supported on the TV model, or when you want to run additional actions alongside the turn-on sequence, such as switching on a connected AV receiver or adjusting the room lighting.

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

{% include triggers/ui_header.md %}

To use this trigger in an automation:

1. Go to {% my automations title="**Settings** > **Automations & scenes**" %}.
2. Open an existing automation, or select **Create automation** > **Create new automation**.
3. In the **When** section, select **Add trigger**.
4. Under **By type**, search and select **Device**.
5. From the **Device** list, select your Samsung TV device.
6. From the **Trigger** list, select **Device is requested to turn on**.

> 7. Select **Save**.

Reviewer: Same, but without the empty step:

```suggestion
 4. Under **By device**, select your Samsung TV device.
 5. From the triggers shown for that device, select **Device is requested to turn on**.
 6. Select **Save**.
```

> 7. Select **Save**.

Author: @fdmarcin Thank you for the feedback! I think they both work but this version has less steps. 👍

### Options in the UI

{% options_ui %}
Device:
  description: >

>     The Samsung TV media player device that should be watched for a turn-on request. Only Samsung TV entities are valid targeted devices for this trigger.

Author: Wanted to avoid the term "target" here since there is no field named "target" for this trigger.

>     The Samsung TV media player device that should be watched for a turn-on request. Only Samsung TV entities are valid targeted devices for this trigger.

Reviewer: Alternative phrasing to avoid suggesting a target:

```suggestion
    The Samsung TV media player device that should be watched for a turn-on request. Only Samsung TV devices can be selected.
```

  required: true
Trigger:
  description: >
    The trigger **Device is requested to turn on**.
  required: true
{% endoptions_ui %}

{% include triggers/yaml_header.md %}

In YAML, refer to this trigger as `device` of type `samsungtv.turn_on`. A basic example looks like this:

{% example %}
trigger: |
  type: samsungtv.turn_on
  device_id: my_samsungtv_device_id
  entity_id: media_player.samsung_living_room
  domain: samsungtv
  trigger: device

> {% endexample %}

Author: YAML code was validated by code owner.

> {% endexample %}

Reviewer: Thanks. I checked with an LLM (explanation below), and this should also work + is consistent with how we have been documenting the triggers in their split pages

```suggestion
In YAML, refer to this trigger as `samsungtv.turn_on`. A basic example looks like this:

{% example %}
triggers:
  - trigger: samsungtv.turn_on
    entity_id: media_player.samsung_smart_tv
{% endexample %}
```

tl;dr:

> Core supports both forms, but the docs should use the direct samsungtv.turn_on trigger form because the trigger: device form is the UI/device automation representation and is converted internally to the direct trigger form.

<details><summary>Details</summary>
<p>

## Device automation form

Defined in `homeassistant/components/samsungtv/device_trigger.py`.

This is what the UI/device automation system exposes:

```yaml
triggers:
  - trigger: device
    device_id: DEVICE_ID
    domain: samsungtv
    type: samsungtv.turn_on
```

Core builds that form here:

```python
def async_get_turn_on_trigger(device_id: str) -> dict[str, str]:
    return {
        CONF_PLATFORM: "device",
        CONF_DEVICE_ID: device_id,
        CONF_DOMAIN: DOMAIN,
        CONF_TYPE: PLATFORM_TYPE,
    }
```

Then `device_trigger.py` converts it internally to the trigger platform form:

```python
trigger_config = {
    CONF_PLATFORM: trigger_type,
    CONF_DEVICE_ID: config[CONF_DEVICE_ID],
}
```

Since `trigger_type` is `samsungtv.turn_on`, this becomes:

```yaml
trigger: samsungtv.turn_on
device_id: DEVICE_ID
```

## Trigger platform form

Defined in `homeassistant/components/samsungtv/triggers/turn_on.py`.

Core’s schema is:

```python
TRIGGER_SCHEMA = vol.All(
    cv.TRIGGER_BASE_SCHEMA.extend(
        {
            vol.Required(CONF_PLATFORM): PLATFORM_TYPE,
            vol.Optional(ATTR_DEVICE_ID): vol.All(cv.ensure_list, [cv.string]),
            vol.Optional(ATTR_ENTITY_ID): cv.entity_ids,
        },
    ),
    cv.has_at_least_one_key(ATTR_ENTITY_ID, ATTR_DEVICE_ID),
)
```

That means this is valid:

```yaml
triggers:
  - trigger: samsungtv.turn_on
    device_id: DEVICE_ID
```

And this is valid:

```yaml
triggers:
  - trigger: samsungtv.turn_on
    entity_id: media_player.samsung_smart_tv
```

So the review comment is correct: the PR’s current YAML example is the device automation form. It may work, but the split trigger page should document the direct trigger platform form, because Core explicitly supports it and that matches the current pattern used by similar trigger pages.

</p>
</details>

> {% endexample %}

Author: Thank you for clarifying this! Made changes accordingly.
